---
layout: post
title:  "Private Mosquitto using docker"
date:   2016-10-16 14:14:14 +0200
categories: home-automation mqtt
---

## New to docker?

Me too!!!

So, brave as we are we fire up a linux server (a free AWS instance for
now, may as well be a digital ocean basic server or something even
cheaper) and just install and start it

    ssh ...
    sudo yum/apt install docker
    sudo service docker start

It happens that downloading and starting services with docker is
straightforward. First you need to know the name for your service and
than just search for it on https://hub.docker.com

One of the most popular dockerized mosquitto at the time that we write
this is https://hub.docker.com/r/toke/mosquitto/

So we simply read the page we just mentioned, and install it with

    sudo docker pull toke/mosquitto

Et voil√†!

We could now run it as it is, but we may want to configure it first to
better suite our needs! After all the title says "Private"!

But we cannot wait, so we do it anyway :)

    sudo docker run --name mqtt toke/mosquitto

We started the docker container without mapping any port or volumes,
so that the service is not yet accessible from the outside, but we can
still do something interesting with it, like having a look at what's
inside firing up a shell into the container:

    sudo docker exec -i -t mqtt /bin/bash

Interestingly enough there is no `init` process, just our mosquitto
server, and our home points to the place where the source for
mosquitto was unpacked. Wandering around we find out that this image
keeps the configuration in `/etc/mosquitto`.

When we are done, we need to stop and remove the instance from docker
so that we can run it again later with different, more useful,
options:

    sudo docker stop mqtt
    sudo docker rm mqtt

Let's create some empty folders that we will use later as docker volumes:

    sudo mkdir -p /srv/toke-mosquitto/{config,data,log}


## Obtaining a certificate

In order for our service to be (hopefully) private we need to set up a
secure channel. We need a certificate.

My favourite at the moment is https://letsencrypt.org/

With a few commands we are set-up:

    sudo yum install epel-release nginx

We configure our virtualhost in /etc/nginx/conf.d/virtual.conf as we
usually do and we open the port 443 in the firewall (or in the
Security groups if we are using AWS).

    sudo service nginx restart
    wget https://dl.eff.org/certbot-auto
    chmod a+x certbot-auto
    ./certbot-auto --nginx -d <my-domain> certonly [--debug]

Our new certificate should now be in /etc/letsencrypt folder.

This is not a full guide on how to obtain a certificate, but following
the errors that you will likely get on the screen, should allow you to
end up with working certificates.

We will need to copy the certificates in a place accessible by docker:

    sudo cp -a /etc/letsencrypt /srv/toke-mosquitto/config/

(we should not forget to do this again when we renew the certs)

Following the instructions here
https://mosquitto.org/2015/12/using-lets-encrypt-certificates-with-mosquitto/
we also create the `chain-ca.pem` file needed by mosquitto:

    cd /srv/toke-mosquitto/config
    wget https://letsencrypt.org/certs/isrgrootx1.pem
    sudo bash -c 'cat /letsencrypt/live/<mydomain>/chain.pem isrgrootx1.pem > chain-ca.pem'

Note: We learn as we do, but looking at the OwnTracks website, for
example, and at the fact that MQTT applications use the certificates
in a different way (the server is not public, so there is no need for
a public CA), it may be that we do not need to go through letsencrypt,
we could just have used some other tool to generate owr own CA,
certificates and even pre shared keys for our devices... And with less
problems of expired keys... Next time we'll do better!


## Configuring Mosquitto

Merging infos from https://github.com/toke/docker-mosquitto and few
other places we can to override the mosquitto configuration and also
persist logs using docker volumes


In which we can put our own `mosquitto.conf` and access control files.

    listener 8883
    allow_anonymous false
    password_file /mqtt/config/pwfile
    cafile /mqtt/config/chain-ca.pem
    certfile /mqtt/config/letsencrypt/live/<my-domain>/cert.pem
    keyfile /mqtt/config/letsencrypt/live/<my-domain>/privkey.pem


To create the missing `pwfile` we can use the mosquitto_pass utility
using another machine or `sudo docker exec -i -t mqtt /bin/bash` on an
image with the config file mounted `rw`.

Note: on AWS we also need to open port 8883 in the security group to
make it reachable.


## Ready to start

We are ready to start our mosquitto with ssl support using docker:

    sudo docker run -ti -p 8883:8883 -v /srv/toke-mosquitto/config/:/mqtt/config:ro -d --name mqtt toke/mosquitto

And we can test that it works from our laptop by issuing the following
command:

    mosquitto_pub -h <my-domain> -t test/topic -m test -p 8883 --capath /etc/ssl/certs/


To troubleshoot issue with SSL we can also use

    wget https://letsencrypt.org/certs/isrgrootx1.pem
    openssl s_client -connect <my-domain>:8883 -CAfile isrgrootx1.pem

Happy hacking!


## What I learned

I learned a couple of things while doing this:

* Next time I should generate my own CA and certificates, and also
authenticate users with certificates instead of passwords.

* Instead of writing pages like this I could just have written a much
  shorter `Dockerfile` to do all the required steps!
